- 3

{
4

COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF | 12th January 1989
ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION

Meeting on 10th January 1989
(BIS, Room E)

The Chairman (First tape 6 - 39) (Interpretation)

«»- Do you feel that after the Report has been handed over, if
the European Council, for instance, were to ask for additional technical
information, do you think that it is this Committee that will have to meet
in order to produce this additional information or do you think that the
usual bodies of the Community would have to handle this - the Committee of
Governors, the Monetary Committee or the Commission? Should the Council ask
for additional information, do you think that if the Council were to say we
are going to ask the Committee to do some additional work for us, what
would your response be? I discussed this with Gov. Duisenberg yesterday and
we thought that we might think of three stages. First stage: the ad hoc
Committee produces the Report and submits it. Second stage: the usual
authorities of the Community Look into this or that item. Third stage: if a
political decision is reached there would be an intergovernmental meeting
in order to draft a Treaty. In other words, do you think that this
Committee should remain in charge of the whole process? It is a question I
submit to you, you may wish to think about it, but if you have an immediate
response I would be very grateful for you to express your views, but
otherwise at least think about this. Think about the content also of the

Report, the extent to which it should go into detail, and its style.
The Chairman (314 - 395) (Interpretation)

Might I perhaps suggest a work programme for the next’ three
meetings before we start tackling the two items on our agenda for today.
Section III of the Report is one of the items and then a discussion, which

I suggest should be a separate discussion, on the ECU - separate because

the matter is so complex. If we complete our discussion on Section III,
which is fairly complex, and if we also manage to conclude our discussion
on the ECU, then at the February meeting we would have before us a new
draft of Section II on the final stage of the economic and monetary union,
which will have taken into account everything that was said during the very
fruitful December meeting. This would enable us to review Section II and
would also enable us to come up with an answer to the following question.
As the Report stands, is not too much of the burden of regulating financial
transactions put on the monetary authorities and if we go too far in the
direction of a transfer of powers then I am afraid we are going to end up
with a solution which is totally unrealistic and certainly unacceptable -
but we will rediscuss this. Then we will have to have a conversation on
regional policy. The other day Mr. Boyer said, in order to clarify the
Situation, quite apart from the general framework which enables one to
exercise some control on fiscal and economic policy, regional policy will
make us think about the conditions which have to be satisfied for economic
cohesion within the framework of an economic and monetary union which goes
beyond what the Single European Act will bring about. Implementing the
Single Act, of course, implies better co-operation in the macro-economic
field and the monetary field, but economic and monetary union is a_ step
beyond that and I think that in our first Part we make this quite clear.
People are not quite aware of this, quite a lot of politicians enjoy
muddling the whole thing. Scientifically one cannot say that the economic
and monetary union is necessary for the successful implementation of the
Single European Act, what we can say on the other hand is that in order to
achieve all the objectives of the Single Act, and if we had never talked
about economic and monetary union, we would nevertheless have found that we
have to strengthen our co-operation in the monetary area and in the field
of macro-economic policy - this we have to be quite clear about. This would
then mean that in good time before the March meeting you would have a_ full
draft of the Report which we might examine and then we would do the same
thing on a second draft in April. This would mean that the Committee would
not only have discussed each topic, but would also have an overall view of
the whole thing, not at the very last meeting but before that. Would this
schedule be acceptable to you? We might of course refine it, taking into

account your comments.

- 3-

If this proves satisfactory we can then move on to Section III.
At the last meeting the chapter-by-chapter discussion of Section II proved
quite useful. I wonder, however, whether for Section III we ought not
first, before we go through the various chapters, discuss the two scenarios
in more general terms. Sooner or later we will have to do this. We can of
course go through this chapter-by-chapter until we come up to the point
where the scenarios are described, but then-~ I suggest that we have a
general discussion, not as to whether we should submit two scenarios but
about the pros and cons of each scenario. I do not want to trigger off a
confrontation but the Secretaries and I myself need more arguments to

support both scenarios.
Herrn K.O. Pohl (397 - 630)

I think, Mr. Chairman, that is a good proposal if I may say so,
because that is really the core of the matter. There is no reason for
confrontation because we are not here ina negotiating process, we just
study these matters and discuss them and everybody is free to express his
own views, there is no reason for any kind of confrontation. Having said
that, I think it would be very regrettable if we would come up with a
Report which gives the impression that the Heads of State and governments
have the choice between two different scenarios, as we call them. Two
scenarios which give the impression of being equal, have the same weight
and that there is a choice. That is not the case I think, because I think
several of us - at least myself ~- cannot accept Scenario B and I want to
make that very clear. I wonder whether we shouldn't try to aim, at least,
for only one scenario, one set of concrete proposals and if we can't reach
agreement on certain proposals, particularly the proposal of the Reserve
Fund and that is the main point, maybe we can persuade those who have
proposed that to give up the idea, but that remains to be seen.

I have to apologise that I am going to speak a little longer
because I have several points to make and I want to make them in context,
and I think it is very important and leads us really to the core of the
matter. On pages 5 and 6 it is said that “both scenarios see scope for
immediate and meaningful measures in both the economic and monetary areas",
but then the Report lists a number of what the Report calls "justifications

for a more substantial first step", as outlined in Scenario B. That gives

- 4 -

the impression - and I think the wrong impression - that Scenario A is the
less substantial of the two scenarios. I do not agree with that
interpretation and I would like to see that the Report correctly reflects
the intentions and substance of Scenario A, which is the one I suggested
here at one of our previous meetings. To this end I have prepared a new
text for pages 5 and 6 beginning with the 2nd para. on p. 5 which lists the
arguments in support of both scenarios in I think a more balanced way and
not only those in support of one scenario. For that purpose I have prepared
a text which I would like the Secretariat to distribute to you. I would
like to read the text which should replace para. 2 on p. 5, starting with
"Both scenarios ...". (Reads text).

That 1s so to say the balanced description of the philosophy
behind Scenario A and then if we cannot avoid it - I hope we can find a
compromise - we could continue saying "Scenario B considers the creation
-»-' as it has been said in the Report. This is on the addition of the
Report. What I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, is that we give this text to
the Secretariat - we don't have to discuss it in detail here, I don't
insist on that - and that we leave it to the Secretariat to include at
least the spirit of this addition in the next version of our Report.

I want to say a few words on the substance and the legal problems
which I see with respect to the so-called Scenario B. Firstly, I think one
can make a lot of substantial points about the question of whether one
really needs a Fund with the main purpose, the emphasis on intervention in
the exchange markets. I think the emphasis is wrongly placed because it
gives the impression to the public and to the governments that we are
really able to manage the EMS by intensifying intervention and that the
main, or one of the major problems of a European Monetary System would be
to co-ordinate interventions against third currencies. This is in my view
not the case. What we really need is better co-ordination and more
agreement on the objectives of monetary policy. That is also included, but
in second place and it doesn't have the same rating in the proposal as the
question of intervention. That is becoming very clear because it is a
Reserve Fund, that is the first step.

The other thing is that I really don't think that we need such an
institution in order to improve the functioning of the EMS. We have done
what we could to improve the functioning of the EMS in the Basle/Nyborg

agreement, we have gone very far to increase the short-term credit

-5-

facilities, etc. and there is, in my view at least, no reason to set up a
new institution just to improve the functioning of the EMS. What is really
necessary for the better functioning of the EMS, or for the strengthening
of the EMS, in my view is of course that all member countries are able and
willing to participate in the EMS. I think we should as a group - I hope we
can include all our members - really strongly emphasise the message that
full membership and full participation in fulfilling the rules of the EMS
and pursuing the policies which are necessary to fulfil the rules and
participate in the EMS is the major step forward in the direction of a
monetary union. It is not very spectacular and not very new but that is
what we really need and not a new institution. That is on the substance of
the thing. I have one point on the substance, one could say a lot of other
things.

Another point which I think is very important are the legal
considerations. Article 102A, as introduced in the EEC Treaty by the
Unified Act, has clarified that “insofar as further development of economic
and monetary policy necessitates institutional changes" - and this is
certainly an institutional change setting up a Fund like this and
transferring part of the national reserves to a _ supra-international
institution - "the provisions of Article 236 shall be applicable". That is
clearly stated in this Single European Act, there is no doubt about that.
‘The Article comes under the heading "Co-operation in economic and monetary
policy (economic and monetary union)" - that is by the way the only place
where economic and monetary union is mentioned in a European legal paper.
So it is not limited to the institutional changes proposed in the context
of progress towards monetary union, but to any institutional changes in the
area of monetary and economic policy. I think that is very clear and that
was one of the major points of controversy when this was discussed in
Luxembourg. The establishment of a Reserve Fund would no doubt be an
institutional change and would thus fall under the stipulated procedure of
Article 236 and it could be done, in my view, only in the context of this
Treaty which we are discussing. If we find it reasonable and appropriate
then I don't think it would be necessary, but if we find it necessary it
has to be included in the negotiating process for a Treaty. It could be
argued, and that would be an alternative I agree, as mentioned in Scenario
B, but we shouldn't underestimate the difficulties of that alternative

which would be that we would change national laws in each of the European

- 6 -

countries. In our case, for instance, it would mean that if we would set up
such a Fund with all the powers transferred to that Fund that we would have
to change the Bundesbankgesetz, but that is maybe even more complicated
than a procedure under Article 236. What I think is absolutely impossible
and not acceptable legally would be a procedure which led to the creation
of the EMS, just a Council decision and leave it to the Council of
Governors or the ECOFIN to fill the details, that I think is very contrary
to all principles which we have defended over the last 10 years since we
discussed the establishment of the EMS. For that legal reason alone, if not
for other reasons, I think this Scenario B is practically not conceivable.
What can we do? What I would be prepared to discuss is that we include part
of the proposals in Scenario B into Scenario A, which would then be the
only proposal. For instance, it has been said in Scenario A that there
should be a Committee for banking supervision, this has to be clarified
whether that is acceptable or not, but I would be prepared and ready to
accept also that we would set up two other committees - the two. suggested
in Gov. de Larosiére's proposal - namely one for the co-ordination of
exchange rate policies and another for the co-ordination of monetary
policy. These are the two proposals in his paper. That I think can be done
as long as these committees have no decision-taking power, can give only
recommendations to the governors and then the governors could, under’ the
proposals in Scenario A, give recommendations to governments, central
banks, etc. This is still conceivable in my view with existing laws,
without changing the Treaty or having a new Treaty. It goes very far and
maybe it will be questioned whether it is consistent, but I would be
prepared to go that far. I think those would be two substantial elements
from Scenario B which we could include in Scenario A. What I cannot and
would not accept is the proposal of setting up a Reserve Fund with all this
emphasis on intervention which I think gives a completely wrong impression
and is legally not acceptable. |

My last point is the following. If the Committee is not prepared
to follow my suggestion and if some colleagues insist on having the two
scenarios, I would very much urge you to indicate very clearly in the
Report - at first here in the group, but later maybe also in the Report —-
who is supporting Scenario A and who is supporting Scenario B, because we
should not give the impression that these are two things the Heads of State

and governments could choose between.

Herrn K.O. Pohl (724 -755)

We can agree on that point. That is no problem, we can change the
language. You are right it is a little polemic, that is no problem. The
legal thing, Jacques. This Committee as it looks may propose a very
far-reaching institutional change, and that is a new Treaty for monetary
union, for an ESCB. My point is only that we should not envisage legal and
institutional changes before we have agreed on the details of the
institutional framework for the monetary system. What you are’ suggesting,
and that is one of my main objections or reservations against your
proposal, is that it is a kind of prejudice for the final system and what
we will finally get is only the Reserve Fund and we will never get a

European monetary union ...

May I follow on this, because it is very important for me to
understand. Would you be less reserved if this creation of a Fund were to
be an integral part of a vision of the Treaty? You would be less reserved,

I understand.
Herrn K.Q. Pohl

At least one could discuss whether in a final ESCB, for instance,
I would be very much in favour of a pooling of reserves, not only 10% much
more, maybe all reserves, if there would be an ESCB. In my view such a ECSB
has to have access to the reserves, has to own the reserves, which is very
much the system we have in Germany, not the respective governments, that
would be a very substantial part. What I don't want to see is that we do a
little bit and then nothing will happen later, because we have the Reserve
'Fund which has nothing to say because you will never reach 7? in such. an
institution and I really cannot, frankly speaking, see what the function of

such an institution would be.

- 8 -
The Rt. Hon. Robert Leigh-Pemberton (756 - 808)

Mr. Chairman, I don't know whether it is wise to ask to speak now
and I find myself between two colleagues whose views have been so
eloquently expressed, it is the accident of the alphabet which causes me to
sit here and have a name which has both L on my right and P on my left. May
I be quite straight forward immediately, Mr. Chairman, and say that it is
the business of the introduction of Scenario B that has given me most
anxiety in this Part III draft and I have thought about it very carefully
and find myself in the same position as President Pohl in my conclusion on
this. I must be quite straight forward and frank in saying that. I support
his reasons and I put forward this further reason. J. de Larosiére_ said,
are we feeling that it is really inconceivable that we should accept an
institutional change? I answer that by saying, certainly not. We are going
to have an institutional change at some stage in our proceedings if we are
to achieve economic and monetary union and I support that. What I feel so
anxious about is acquiring institutional change in Stage 1. It is going to
require, as far as I understand it, a change to the Treaty and if I may go
back to the point I made at one of our earlier meetings, I do think that it
is sensible for us to consider what are the political practicalities of the
situation, and consequently, what are the best moves’ to make in order to
secure progress? I am extremely worried that we will not secure Treaty
change for Stage 1. In the case of my country the formation of the ERF will
require domestic legislation. The ? reserves of the UK can be inalienably
transferred to a European institution, we will need a new act of
Parliament, and I have to say to you that I regard that as a very
impractical likelihood at the moment. I would much prefer, therefore, that
we can agree on a Stage 1 which will not involve legislation change, either
in the UK or as I understand it in the Federal Republic, because then at
least we will make some progress towards Stage 1 and we will not have hit
up against the impact of domestic political problems immediately. I would
like to say that if we could avoid the problem of the inalienable transfer
of reserves to this embryo it would be possible to introduce some sort of
body as J. de Larosiére is proposing for us. And quite independently of
K.O. Pohl - I have not colluded with him on this - I have come to the
conclusion that we could easily allow the three committees to come into

existence that he has suggested - the banking = supervision, the

-9 -

co-ordination of monetary policy and exchange rate policies. I think this
would be a good move and I think we would also be able to establish, would
we not, a permanent research centre to support these committees, which
would reinforce what we have at the moment - we don't really have anything
very concrete in that respect. I find myself arguing alongside President
Pohl for the sort of progress in Stage 1 that he is Suggesting, really as

much on the grounds of principle as also a political practicality.
Mr. M. Boyer (890 - 940) (Interpretation)

Mr. Chairman, I think that Scenario A at first sight gives the
impression of representing a small step forward only and one might fear
that the procedure which is triggered off will not suffice to really give
enough of an impulse to the whole development. It is also true, however,
that to go further during the lst stage would require substantial legal
changes to be introduced and legal changes require a lot of time, so. the
first steps can certainly not amount to very much if one cannot envisage
such fundamental changes. This being said I think that there is consensus
on this, namely that the nucleus of the central bank system and _ the
strengthening of the Committee of Governors are more important than setting
up a ERF. If one creates too many bodies then perhaps there won't be enough
left to the Committee of Governors, which ultimately has to be the motor of
the whole exercise. Therefore I think that right from the start one ought
to reinforce and strengthen the Committee of central bank Governors and I
have not found one thing which seems to me essential for this strengthening
in the Report or anywhere else, namely a compromise, the will to compromise
between the Governors in order to harmonise matters in this area. I think
it is essential for the central bank Governors' Committee to be
strengthened really and to have an embryo of a central bank, this would not
be possible if the authority of central banks Governors is not more or less

the same in all countries. If we have, on the one hand, central bank

governors that are strictly controlled by Ministries of Finance, and if, on

the other hand, we have central bank governors who are quite autonomous,
then I think that things will be very difficult. Therefore I think that
right from the start we ought to make a recommendation which would indicate
_that those central banks which have less independence in European countries

benefit from internal changes which would give them a greater degree of

- 10 -

independence vis-a-vis their governments. Then, and this is going to be my
last point, I think that one should not accept right from the start that
one needs two scenarios, one ought to try and see how much of one scenario
can be included in the other. I think this is what Gov. Pohl was
suggesting. Could one not include the committees which are sketched out in
Scenario B in Scenario A? Without setting up a Reserve Fund as such, could
one not envisage the joint use of reserves for the purpose of interventions
which might have been agreed jointly by governors? What I am trying to say
is that one should not emphasise the opposition between the two scenarios,
but try and see if they could be merged to some extent. If ultimately one
discovers that one cannot do this and one has to keep the two, but could
one not first try and make an effort to see whether one cannot merge’ the

two scenarios?
Dott. C.A. Ciampi (941 - 1031) (Interpretation)

I would like to speak Italian if I may because I hope to be
clearer in this way. After this discussion I really do believe that’ the
Stage 1 becomes the most important point of all and it is on this that our
most important decision will have to be made, because as far as the later
stages are concerned I think that our views are more similar. We have
before us two scenarios and I agree that if we submit two scenarios in our
Report with different degrees of consensus, this as I see it would water
down the importance of our Report and would also reduce the impact it may
have on our readers. We have problems of substance and we have problems of
a legal nature.

As for the problems of substance I should like to repeat
something which I have said time and again and which was a concern of mine.
1990, firstly, and then 1992. If we are going to confront these dates under
present conditions then we shall run very serious dangers, dangers for the
existing system. I have always made this point very clearly at Committee of
Governors’ meetings. Hence, it appears to me extremely important to ensure
that by 1990 already we have made an important step forward towards a
monetary policy which will be agreed and managed jointly by central banks
on an ex ante basis, this in order to avoid our running the risk of having
to cope with a crisis descending on a system which has been working very

well for 10 years now. This is my basic concern. Then it seems to me that a

- ll -

number of things which are included in Scenario A can already be
implemented within the existing bodies, for instance, the Committee of
Governors. There is no reason why we should not give ourselves a
Secretariat which would look after monetary policy. There is no reason at
all why we should not make other decisions of an effective'and practical
nature and which would help us, for instance, to constantly evaluate our
policies and we might come up with recommendations about these policies
which we might even make public. In Scenario B what I found to be important
was the qualitative leap over and beyond the ways in which all of this
would be put into practice. I am not saying that I would like to attach so
much importance to a policy of intervention, and after all Gov. de
Larosiére has somewhat watered down his position on this, I would emphasise
other things: monetary policy, intervention in a wider. sense of the word
and which might occur after consultation. If one is confronted by a crisis
due to capital movements, a joint examination by central bank Governors of
the situation which would result in their making a clear statement as_ to
the nature of the crisis and after that there would be joint action. to face
up to this crisis. This is of fundamental importance as I see it. Therefore
in Scenario B what I see is the emphasis put on this quantitative leap.
There is no. doubt at all that Scenario B would involve institutional
changes and hence would cause problems, in particular problems in respect
of the time frame. If I look at this Report, I note that it is written here
on p. 7 - and nobody has said anything about this - that in Scenario A "in
the institutional field preparation and modification of the Treaty". Now
phase 1 provides for a Treaty to be drafted and that governments would have
to approve this Treaty. Therefore, although a discussion will show whether
it will be possible to find a compromise, as suggested by Prof. Boyer, a
compromise which would enable us to merge the basic substance of both
scenarios, I wonder whether one can envisage drafting a Treaty quickly. Is
this not a major task and I think we ought to give some indication in the
Report as to what institutional changes would result from this new Treaty.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman ... (What do you mean immediately?) Well, if we
want to have a Treaty and want the Treaty to be ratified you must think in
terms of two or three years. Our deadline is 1992. Are we going to have a
new Treaty by 1992, yes or no is the question I ask myself. When one talks
about a new Treaty is one remembering these dates, because if one does

remember these deadlines then it seems to me that if we now discuss matters

- 12 -

which imply institutional changes one should not lose sight of the fact
that a new Treaty will have to be produced during this period, while of
course looking into those changes which can be introduced and do not
require institutional changes, changes affecting the way in which we do
certain things, if this would result in greater efficiency and if this
would mean that central banks would jointly look into monetary policies.
Not only would they look into these policies jointly, but would monitor

them.
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg (1060 - 1117)

The later you speak, the briefer you can be, that is an
advantage. Let me make it quite clear from the outset that I would also
strongly prefer not to have 2 scenarios, but only one and in that I can
accept almost all the elements of Scenario B to be included in Scenario A,
except - and I think that is the most striking difference - the creation of
an ERF in the final stage. In the Skeleton Report on pages 5 and 6 three
justifications are mentioned, President Pohl referred to them, for a_ more
substantial first step. I think all three of them can also be used for
Scenario A and not only to defend Scenario B. All three, in a more balanced
presentation, would be in support of Scenario A, strengthen Scenario A_ and
not only for B. I must as a side remark say that I have some difficulty
with the third justification and I do want to mention it, namely the
tendency of the European central banks to conduct their monetary policies
on the basis of differentials vis-a-vis other countries is not necessarily
conducive to fostering a monetary policy satisfactory for the Community as
a whole. This suggests by implication, and to be quite specific, that the
Bundesbank has to weaken its monetary policy stance to become more European
and that is something I would like to reject - but that is only a_ side
remark. So the three justifications, with the side remark, I can see being
used for Scenario A as well. Admittedly in his second presentation Gov. de
Larosiére certainly provided a much more balanced account and proposal,
with much more emphasis on co-ordination of policies and the need to
gradually work towards that end. The only element is still the ERF in the
first stage, which for various reasons I cannot accept. Also because as it
has been said before it puts the emphasis at a very early stage at the

wrong end. The main task of an ESCB, or whatever you may want to call it,
- 13-

the primary task is to promote domestic, European price stability, and here
the first step would be to put all the emphasis on external stability,
exchange rate stability. I think that is also as a signal the wrong order
if we were to do that. But we could start with the learning process, we
could start with creating the basis for analytical support, we could start
also, I agree with President Boyer, with emphasising the necessity of
independence of an ultimate ESCB by already pointing out to governments
that they should take steps in those cases where their autonomy has not yet
been sufficiently realised - they could do that already at an early stage.
Only the centralisation of tasks of intervention of currencies is a matter
of technical order, but not a principal thing at this stage and would
provide the wrong signal, as I said.

In brief, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that we can forget about the
letters A and B in our presentation, that we would be able to strengthen A.
I could live with the suggestion of creating three sub-committees, one on
supervision, one on exchange rates and one on a Federal policy, although I
must say that in my mind exchange rate policies and monetary policies are
so linked together that Ido not clearly see the need to have two
committees for that, but as a matter of compromise, if all others would
want that, I could accept two committees for these two issues, but I would
prefer to have it in one: exchange rate policy and monetary policy. I could
accept that and therefore I would say that I would like to support

Governors Pohl and Leigh-Pemberton in their approach.
Mr. E. Hoffmeyer (1143 -1188)

I have one point of principle. Some remarks, particularly on p.
2, on the question of divisibility. When you say divisibility, that means
whether you can transfer part of decision power Or you have to transfer
almost all of it. On p. 2 to 3 it is clearly stated that you cannot
transfer part of a decision power, whereas on p. 11 and 12 in Scenario A
there is a proposal or suggestion that you can transfer part of
decision-making power and in Scenario B the proposal on: the ERF is also an
example of transferring part of the power. What is the opinion? You cannot
have both - p. 1 and 2 where you give the wrong impression, the wrong
Signals to the market if you divide the decision-making power. I am in

favour of p. 1 and 2 and this means I think that it is simply a_ wrong

®

- 14 -

structure to transfer part of decision-making power. It is simply not in
line with efficient policy making. Therefore, I would support what has been
mostly said that you try both to strengthen the work that can be done
without changing the Treaty and that you prepare for a new Treaty in case
that the Heads of State want to have the final goal of an economic and
monetary union. I have one suggestion, that is that you could tighten the
demands or requests that you put on this Committee of central bank
Governors by making it necessary for them to develop a set of rules’ that
have to be followed by the various countries. You have convergence either
by way of following a certain set of rules or by transferring
decision-making power. If you agree that you cannot transfer part of the
decision-making power but eventually only all of it, you could have’ some
rules, and that underlines what Mr. Thygesen said that you could simply
make a list of rules which the individual countries should follow. You
could report on whether this has’ been fulfilled and you could see how
gradually convergence becomes more efficient. This would mean, as Gov.
Godeaux once said, that you have to see things done, you can simply report
whether these targets have been fulfilled. I have a list of the rules, you
have exchange rate behaviour, monetary policy targets, budget targets, tax
?, social policy, cost development - you could have such a set of things
where you say you have to follow these rules. This would put pressure both

on the monetary authorities and on the political authorities in charge of

fiscal policy. In that way it would be a more efficient step towards the

2nd stage, but I think we have to be very clear about whether we think you
can transfer with efficiency part of decision-making power. There I think

we are on safe ground.
Mr. M. Rubio (1191 - 1239) (Interpretation)

The main aim of this proposal put forward by Gov. de Larosiére
was to have institutional change, because he said without institutional
change it is almost impossible to change the nature and the working of
monetary policies. That was his main point and I must say that I quite
agree with this idea. I also see absolutely no way in which we could simply
have some minor changes here and there, some minor new details in the
functioning of the Committee of Governors which would then lead to new

monetary policy in the member countries. I think without major changes

- 15 -

there will be no real change in their policies. If we want major changes I
see major difficulties because the legal difficulties of creating such an
institution are really very very considerable. If we think of a new
institution and we think that we want to have an institution that will help
us overcome these legal difficulties, well I don't really think it is on
and I think that if we do not overcome the legal difficulties we cannot
have an institution that will have major weight and a major role to play.
The way in which the monetary policy is working means, as I said, that if
we want to have change in monetary policy we will need I think a new Treaty
~ major changes. I fully understand the reasons behind proposal B, but I do
see, as I have said, major difficulties with this Scenario B. That is why I
think that we have to be quite clear in the way in which we draft our
Report. I think it is quite difficult, as I said, without a change in the
Treaty to have major changes in the way in which the monetary policy of the
various countries works. Now, if the Heads of Governments or Prime
Ministers do want change, I think the only thing they can do is to change
the Treaty in a quicker, more speedy way, because the change which we have
set out in Scenario A is really not up to change the set of rules and the
framework, as I said before, in which we would have a fundamental change
vis-a-vis the present situation - that is quite clear. Now it is also quite
clear that we could make recommendations and put forward proposals in the
Committee of Governors concerning Scenario A, but as I said before without
institutional change I think that wouldn't lead us very far either.
Therefore I would like to repeat again - major changes in the working and
functioning of monetary policy is only possible if we have major
institutional changes.

To come to my conclusion, I think we should put forward just one
alternative, pointing out the difficulties that arise. And secondly, I
think we should make it quite clear in our Report that Stage A means that,
as I said before, we would have to have major changes in the _ present
situation otherwise we cannot make a step forward. Then it is up to the
Heads of Government and Prime Ministers to see whether they want such a
change. If they think it is necessary, if they think that it is important,

fine, otherwise there is not really much point in discussing this further.

- 16 -
M. A. Lamfalussy (1311 - 1373)

Let me start by saying that I will try to be as clear as all my
predecessors have been and I am very happy to see the way the discussion is
going because we are really touching substance. The first point I would
like to make is that I am certainly of the view of those who believe that.
it is absolutely essential that we come out with one scenario. I think it
would be a great pity if we came out with two scenarios, it would be a pity
for the credibility of the Committee and its members and it may derail
further discussions into directions which I would prefer to avoid. That is
just one general remark.

My second remark - and I am coming now to the substance - is that
clearly the major problem here is whether in the first stage you should or
should not have an institutional change. I think that is, as Mr. Andriessen
said, at the heart of our debate. Let me begin by saying that I do have a
fairly fundamental sympathy for an institutional approach, but I will
qualify that in a minute. The reason for this sympathy is that an
institutional change has a symbolic value and symbols are extremely
important, you shouldn't underestimate that, that institutions do carry
constraints and I have a reading of the EMS experience in which I. think
that the constraining element has played a major role in shaping the
convergence of policy decisions. Therefore the greater constraint we have,
the more institutions we have, the greater the possibility of effective
convergences. This is the reason why my sympathy, and I must state very
clearly, goes for the thrust of the argument set forward by J. de
Larosiére. However, I must say immediately that I have a second priority
also and that is a speedy change in the effective monetary policy
co-operation and general policy co-operation among the member countries. My
own reading of the present situation is that a speedy change is at least as
important, and perhaps even more important, than an institutional change. I
am extremely preoccupied by what might happen to the EMS, not in three
years' time, but in one year and that is very much along the line of the
argument because we have now gone very far in liberalising capital
movements - I am happy with that and it is a fact. This liberalisation is
happening in a world environment where expectations may run in all possible
directions, where the speed of transmission of interest rate movements 1s

extremely speedy, and because also I do see basic imbalances in terms of

- 17-

current accounts within the EMS. I think this has to be said very bluntly.
We do have these basic imbalances and therefore things may happen within
the EMS that will need a very very careful handling, not excluding perhaps
exchange rate changes, etc. but it has to be under control, it will have to
be put under control so as not to waste really 10 years of very very
successful experience. It is for this reason that I would be in favour of a
lst stage which could be implemented as quickly as possible and not in a
two or three-year distant future, but starting this autumn or at least at
the end of this year. If it appears that the creation of a Reserve Fund
runs into institutional obstacles in individual countries or in terms of a
Treaty, then my clear preference would be of a first stage, as outlined in
Scenario A, appropriately beefed-up if I may say so by taking over all the
elements of Scenario B, except the Reserve Fund. That would be my idea and
that is the major, very practical reason for - despite my sympathies with B
- being in favour of the first stage in Scenario A. Then the question would
arise, how to go onto the second or first stage, but let me perhaps come

back to that at a later stage.
Herrn K.O. Pohl (1568 - 1686)

I wonder whether we have time for a second round of discussions,
but I appreciate the discussion today because it really brings us to the
concrete problems and to the set of proposals which we have to make. I want
to limit myself only to a few remarks in response to what has been said
around the table. Firstly, Mr. Thygesen, you referred to proposals on the
European Central Bank which you said I have made - I don't know to which
proposals you are referring to, but I don't think we should discuss that
today, this is a different chapter, we will discuss that next time I
understand when we talk about the character of an ESCB. That was a
misunderstanding what you said, that is not my view that the institution
should only consist of the Board of Governors and that the Executive Board
should have nothing to say. On the contrary, I think an ESCB should be
constructed in my view very similarly to, let us say, the: American system
more than the German system. I would not advocate the German system as a
model for many reasons which we can discuss when we come to that point. I
am not convinced, frankly speaking, that the German system is the most

optimal system, I think that the American system is much better than ours.

- 18 -

But this is a different story and we will have to discuss that on a
different occasion.

The point I want to emphasise and where I want to take a very
different view from what has been said by some colleagues here around the
table is the following. M. Rubio, Lamfalussy and others have made the’ same
point: major institutional changes are necessary to take a step forward. I
think that is a great misunderstanding if I may say that with all respect.
I don't think we need major institutional changes, for instance, in order
to avoid a crisis in the EMS if it would happen. We don't need a Reserve
Fund, for instance, which wouldn't help to get a crisis under control. You
said there is a crisis and therefore we need institutional changes ~ maybe
I misunderstood you. What I think is really necessary to make progress
towards a monetary union are, in the first place, decisions which can be

taken on a national level today within the given legal framework. That is

first of all, and I repeat what I have said many times before, but we have.

to say that in our Report very clearly in my view. Firstly, that the EMS

has to be completed and all members’ states of the member countries of the
EMS should join the EMS and fulfil the rules of the EMS and that goes of
course for Britain and countries like Spain, which doesn't need any
institutional change because we have the institution, we have the EMS, we
have the rules and we have the Treaty on the EMS, it needs only a decision
on the national level - in Italy you have to reduced the band, etc. That
would be a major step forward towards a monetary union, a very substantial
step, much more than any institutional change which we can envisage within
the next 2 years.

The second thing has already been decided and that is_ the
liberalisation which is a very very major step in the direction of a
monetary union. It has been decided and it has to be implemented. Maybe
that was a little undervalued in the public and in the markets and maybe we
should emphasise this in our Reports.

The most important thing is that we should aim for, you called it
a set of rules and I think that maybe we should call it a set of principles
or a set of rules, but what is meant is that we are aiming for more
convergence in economic performance. If we would recommend to the Council
that all member states of the Community would commit themselves to a policy
which would lead to inflation rates, let us say below 3% as an example, and

to reduce their budget deficit to levels, let us say below 3% of GDP, very

- 19 -

concrete steps which wouldn't need any institutional change but would be a
very very major and substantial step in the direction of a monetary and
economic union. These are the kind of recommendations we should not forget
in our Report. They are included, but I am of the opinion that we should
make them much clearer, because we have to avoid the illusion that some
institutional changes would bring about the kind of substantial
improvements which we really need.

There is one point which I miss in our proposals and which I
think we have to include. Talking about the first step I think we have to
mention at some occasion that as long as divergences exist to the extent
that we have them, realignments and changes in exchange rates have to be a
legitimate instrument for the adjustment process. What was said about’ the
imbalances in the EMS and the economies of the EEC, trade balances, current
accounts, etc., it is of course absolutely obvious that there are these
imbalances but we should not give the impression and fuel the illusion that
by having more access to short-term financing, liquidity, reserve funds,
credit facilities, etc. that that would lead to less imbalances. On the
contrary, the more we rely on intervention the less constraint there is to
reduce the imbalances. As a last resort, of course, exchange rate changes
should not be excluded as long as these imbalances exist, because otherwise
all the pressures will be in other areas - wages, interest rates, etc. I
think we should include one little paragraph on that problem.

One or two other points of Lesser importance. What has been said
about the strengthening of central banks’ independence by Mr. Boyer, that
is of course a very welcome suggestion, but I wonder whether we could ask
our respective governments to strengthen our own positions. I want to be
very frank in that respect, it is not applicable to those central banks
which have a certain dependence to their governments and _ finance
ministries, it goes also for myself because I am not as independent as
people think I am. I am very dependent on the decisions of 18 people, my
Council. This makes it very difficult, if not impossible, Carlo, to agree
to any kind of ex ante co-ordination, because legally I am maybe less able
than others around this table to make any ex ante commitments as far as
interest rates and exchange rates are concerned, because I cannot’ even
decide on buying a stamp for a letter without the approval of the CB
Council - being very extreme. That is the legal position, fortunately it is

different in practice otherwise I wouldn't be here. Legally and in a paper

- 20 -

like this I couldn't agree to say that we have to aim for more ex ante
co-ordination. Necessary as it is and in practice we have done it of
course, I have announced to you interest rate changes in advance very often
and it was made public even, not from here, but from others before it was
decided. This was just a little footnote I wanted to make.

As far as co-ordination of monetary policy is concerned, that
indeed is the main factor and the main thing we should aim for. The legal
preconditions are already there if you read what has been said in 1964 in
the Council Resolution which has lead to the establishment of the Council
of CB Governors, practically everything is said of what we are proposing.
There is not really very much we can add and if you read the statutes of
our group, of the Council of CB Governors, you will recognise that we are-
already today enabled to give recommendations and to tell all the things we
are stipulating here. But maybe, nevertheless, it would be a good thing to
ask the Council to repeat and confirm that and to be a little more detailed
and give a little more strength to this group of central banks and to
authorise, so to say, the CB Governors to make this kind of recommendation
and maybe to upgrade our Committee also by, for instance, giving the
Chairman a little more profile, increasing the research capacities, as Mr.
Leigh-Pemberton suggested, increasing the staff, etc. If we would go
further and envisage what you call the limited step, we would immediately
approach all the problems which we have to solve - fortunately not we but
the governments and Parliaments have to solve when they start to negotiate
a Treaty. You said that as a limited step, could you agree if this Reserve
Fund would be independent, etc. But this causes a lot of problems, the
independence of such a fund causes all the problems we have with a Treaty,
so I don't think we should envisage two institutional steps. It is good
enough and it is great progress, so to say, if we come out with a
recommendation to the Council saying that we as a group recommend § starting
negotiations in the appropriate bodies, in the competent bodies, on a
Treaty for, for instance, the statutes of an ESCB and the European economic
and monetary union. But it is absolutely unrealistic to think that we could
do a little, as you call it limited step within two years which includes
this kind of question, it is inconceivable and very unrealistic in most

countries.

-91-
The Chairman (1798 - 1846) (Interpretation)

Before adjourning the meeting I would like to suggest something
and I hope that this will help us move forward. I will submit two questions
to you and I will express them as clearly as possible. Two questions which
I would like to submit to you as clearly as possible and as frankly as
possible. My first question, as Gov. Doyle said, there are not only two
possible solutions that can be envisaged, there are many such approaches.
Let me take an example - no, it is not an example, a decision is required
here. For the time being the Report proposes to the European Council to
decide as soon as it is able to do this that a Treaty be drafted on
economic and monetary union, just as the European Council of Milan in 1985
decided to amend the Treaty of Rome as to the modalities covering decisions
and as to the objectives of the Treaty. I can assure you that had that
decision not been reached we would not be moving so quickly in _ the
direction of the implementation of the single European market, not to
mention the other two objectives. Where this proposal will be in front of
the Council it may be very possible for one or the other Head of Government
to say I don't want a Treaty, that is why Gov. Doyle says that there are
many different approaches that can be envisaged. But, and this afternoon we
want confirmation before we draft, as soon as the European Council has_ the
proposal for it, we assume it will decide that a Treaty will have to be
drafted. Then the Council will say 6 months were necessary to arrive at the
Single European Act which is very complicated, here it is simpler and all
we need is an intergovernmental conference which will prepare this Treaty,
which will complement the Treaty of Rome. Those who want a Treaty fall into
two parties, there are two schools of thought so to speak, there are those
who say that once the Heads of Government have politically undertaken to
bring about economic and monetary union, you don't need a first step which
will be tantamount to a qualitative leap to be very frank, you can take the
first step of Scenario A since you know that the governments have
politically undertaken to bring about economic and monetary union. Then
there is the other school of thought, people who are a little more
suspicious in their minds, people who will say yes alright but right from
the start one ought to have this qualitative leap to use Gov. Ciampi's
words. This first step, therefore, would imply legislative procedures,

either after a statement issued by the European Council, each government

- 22 -

would include in its national legislation what 1s necessary in order to
make this first step possible. For instance, harmonisation of the statutes
of central banks, plus, if we follow Gov. de Larosiére's suggestion, the
setting-up of this Fund or the second’ solution, there is an
intergovernmental agreement which is then submitted for ratification to
parliament. But in either case the national parliaments will have a word to
say. On the first hypothesis one would make a first step with domestic
legislative changes, but this would really mean that you would have to go
to your national parliaments twice, once for this first step, and secondly,
you would have to get your parliament to ratify the Treaty. I will put the
question as bluntly as I can and I am not going to say that you are going
to sleep over this, but you are going to eat over this and while you are
eating you will think about this whole thing hopefully, so that after lunch
we shall be able to come up with a decision. Do we propose a Treaty? Do we
then identify a first stage which will satisfy everybody or not, bearing in
‘mind what I have just said? The undertaking to finalise a Treaty with a
deadline by when the Treaty will have to be ready and a deadline by when
the European Council would have to approve this Treaty, this is what I did
about 1992. I think this gives one serious guarantees, a priori at least as
I see it now, but perhaps there are a few arguments which escape me. If we
agreed on this then what we would have to do is to specify the contents of
this first stage. So I would like to ask you to think about this and we

will resume at 14.30.
The Chairman (Second tape 20 - 163) (Interpretation)

It seems to me, at least this is my personal opinion, that this
morning's discussion was very fruitful and, as you wished, and if we are
going to have an equally fruitful discussion on the 2nd Section of the
Report, amended to take into account the remarks made in the last meeting,
we shall have erected the two basic pillars on which the Report will rest.
At the end of this morning's session I had left you with a couple of
remarks which were tantamount to questions.

The first question was: does the Committee feel that in order to
move towards economic and monetary union a Treaty is necessary right from
the start? This is what we said in this draft Report, but some have rightly

complained that this is mentioned just in passing in the sentence while

- 23-

describing the two scenarios. Perhaps one ought to make this point with

greater emphasis because I think that this will somewhat dampen down the

difference in Opinion between those who defend Scenario A and those who

defend Scenario B. Now a Treaty, and I think that we would have to say
this, that for each stage - one, two and three - there will be a deadline.
We have done this for the EMS though not very successfully. Just indicate
the various stages is what we did so that one can satisfy those who say
that one cannot build this economic and monetary union under circumstances
which run counter to the project. This I think is an important point which
ought to be made in the Report and which might, perhaps, get the Heads of
Government to understand what lies behind it all. If there is a Treaty then
the credibility of this union will be put in different terms to what they
would be if there were no Treaty. However, there would then remain a
certain controversy. Some will say, since there is a Treaty and the Treaty
is important I have concretely seen the impact of the Single Act which has
imposed sufficient constraints on governments to make progress possible -
institutional objectives, their definition or moving towards them. As. an
academic I would say that without the Single Act we would not have moved
forward as quickly towards the implementation of the single market. If I
may give an example, if the Governor of the Bank of Greece allows me to do
this, one says sometimes there are great presidencies and there are smaller
presidencies, one might say that the Greek presidency was perhaps not one
of the greatest, but under the Greek presidency 30 decisions concerning the
market were reached, 10% of all the decisions necessary to bring about’ the
Single market were made. This of course is the merit. of Greece but also of
the Single Act. Therefore, I do believe that the very existence of a Treaty
changes the situation.

But after that there are still two points of view which remain
and this is my second question. Treaty and the first phase and I think the
first phase will have to coincide with lst July 1990, liberalisation of
capital movements between 8 countries and I think that many politicians are
of this opinion for reasons of consistency. This first phase, one can start
implementing it before the Treaty is approved because no changes are
required here. This is what is described in Scenario A, reinforced perhaps
by some of the ideas to be found in Scenario B. President Péhl has made a
very important reference to the Decision of 1964. The Decision of 1964 can

be taken as it stands or amended somewhat, but one member here said that if

- 24 -

the European Council confirms the Decision of 1964, it will give more
weight to it, it will make it more solemn and may even add something to it,
and some of you this morning said the Committee of Governors would find
their role is strengthened as far as the subjects which fall within their
competence are concerned. They might submit recommendations and_ the
Committee of Governors might be supplied with a Secretariat or some
permanent sub-committees. This morning, although you don't all agree on the
number of committees necessary, you have referred to banking supervision,
exchange rate policy and monetary policy and this would complete the first
stage which would not require any legislative changes at national level.
There are the others who say alright even if there is a Treaty we believe
that the necessary impulse requires a qualitative leap right from the
start, which requires, as I said this morning, legislative change and going
before national Parliaments twice. Those in favour of the 2nd thesis will
say, in any,case you will have to go before the national Parliaments in
order to change the statutes of central banks, why not at the same time get
through measures which would make it possible to implement Scenario B as
far as phase No. 1 is concerned? Personally, I still think that Scenario A,
if there is a Treaty, if the political decision of drafting a Treaty is
made, Scenario A strengthened by some of the elements submitted by Gov. de
Larosiére would mean that as of lst July 1990 we would already have a great
deal of credibility and this would enable the Committee of Governors to

move forward much further, this is my own personal conviction. Could one

- reach a tentative agreement on this point? We could then devote the rest of

this afternoon to a chapter-by-chapter examination of Section III, after
which we can perhaps move on to the ECU, which I said earlier on has to be
dealt with separately. I am sorry if I wasn't quite clear before lunch,
perhaps you were also too hungry, but in order to help the discussion along
I add that if we propose that there be a Treaty and if the political
decision to draft a Treaty is reached and if this Treaty is produced
quickly, then the Scenario A, as enriched, will be enough to give us
credibility, will give enough consistency to the Report and will result in
the Report carrying enough conviction. I agree with you when you say that
we don't want two scenarios in this, although having the two scenarios has
produced this fruitful discussion which we would not otherwise have had.
That is what I propose for the immediate future this afternoon before we

move on to another exercise.
May I jump first to the smallest and the least important,
regarding the question Treaty or not. I think the European Council has not
given a mandate to improve co-operation in the monetary field, it has given
the mandate to show the way to an economic and monetary union and I_ think
also there is a consensus around the table that this entails a change in
the Treaty, definitely. Therefore I think that one should be quite clear in
the Report about the fact that the ambition of an economic and monetary
union entails a change in the Treaty. To set a credible background to any
step that might be the first step, the decision to change the Treaty should
be at the very beginning of this process. It is not enough to say the
Treaty has to be changed, indications have to be given what should be in
the new Treaty. Therefore Chapter II, which we discussed last time, should
be referred to as the main contents of that work towards the Treaty. The
first phase, whether that phase is meaningful without institutional changes
or with institutional changes, given also the time constraint, I think one
could indicate that the first phase could move along two lines, could do
without and has to do without the change in the Treaty and could therefore
be confined to two elements: a reform of the 1964 Directive creating the
Committee of Governors, even if most of the language is there but I think
that politically it would be a useful act to update that, and the second
element, and in my view a very important one, would be a reform also of the
1974 Convergence Directive taking account of the experience, or rather the
poor experience, which has been gained with the 1974 Directive. So that in
the first phase, or preparation for the first phase, one could have a
review of the 1964 and 1974 Directives, prefigurating optimally so to say
what would then be embodied in the Treaty. That is my point of view on that

question.
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg (271 - 296)

Mr. Chairman, perhaps at our last session in April we should
conclude our deliberations by agreeing on a draft communiqué for the
European Council, which would say: we the European Council have decided to
work towards economic and monetary union as fast as possible, we have

understood from the Report we have received from our special Committee that

- 26 -

this requires a change in the Treaty. We have decided to set the change in
the Treaty in motion immediately. In the meantime we are convinced that we
need, in order to prepare for that stage, a maximum of convergence of our
economic performance and therefore intensification of the co-ordination of
our fiscal and monetary policies. We are committed to doing so and we
request the central banks of the Community also to take the maximum steps
within the institutional framework, pending the change of the Treaty, to
promote this further convergence. That may entail setting up committees on
exchange rate and monetary policy, harmonisation of the supervisory rules

through a committee. My answer would be to let the Heads of State agree on

a change in the Treaty and do it immediately.

M. J. de Larosiére (323 - 378)

I would like to make one point. There is a sort of consensus
emerging amongst a number of you to have a, as you call it, recommendation
on setting a working system to get changes in the Treaty and in the
meantime immediately set up an enrichment of A which does not entail any
changes in national legislation, let alone’ the Treaty. I would like and I
would need eventually even if I were the only one, but I don't think I am
the only one, to add to that which I can accept, so you would really have
one proposal which would be the Treaty plus an enriched A to which I could
associate myself. I would need, and I would ask you to be a little mindful
of my position, some language saying some Governors, some not the majority
- I don't think we need to pinpoint things - think that a first
manifestation of a sort of qualitative improvement in the system through
the creation of a Fund, I would refer to the proposal, would add to the
credibility in this in the first place. I wouldn't belabour that point, you
would put somewhere the description of that idea but you wouldn't make it
the unanimous thing. I think it is fair that after the discussions we have
had, after what a number of us have said - Mr. Ciampi, Mr. Rubio, Mr.
Lamfalussy and myself - it is fair that some mentioning of that idea be
incorporated. Technically you could do it legally in the following way. You
could imagine, in order not to have two legislative sets of changes that
would bump into each other, you could do it in the following way if you
took my thesis. You would have, firstly, this A enriched that we could set

up ourselves in the rather immediate future. Then if those who liked my

- 27 -

idea would ask the Treaty negotiators to have two steps in the architecture
of the Treaty. A first step that would be the creation of this embryo and
then other steps that would lead to the ultimate stages and the embryo idea
would then be under the aegis of the negotiation of a Treaty but with a
first concrete manifestation. You could do it that way inside the ? of the

Treaty.
Herrn K.O. Pohl (381 - 418)

I also agree with that suggestion. I think that would be a
solution of the dilemma of having two different so-called scenarios which
is certainly not a good idea. What I understand from what you said and what
I agree with is that we have a list of so to say proposals. Firstly, the
Treaty, second proposal is that all EEC countries should join the system -
I don't want to repeat the long list of proposals. I would very much urge
including in this list of proposals - we should think about whether we
could enlarge the list to acertain extent or give it more weight - the
idea, which was mentioned this morning by Gov. Hoffmeyer, to have what he
called a set of rules, in the G-5/G-7 context we call it a set of
indicators, that is also in the same line. I think we should give some
thought to that idea because I think that is a very productive idea. We
suggest to the Council that they should decide on a set of rules or
indicators in order to measure the economic performance of the member
countries, economic monetary performance, of course, with the objective of
drawing conclusions from that in the appropriate bodies. I think that is a
very concrete and practical suggestion. I also want you to include the
para. which I mentioned on the exchange rates. I don't want to repeat all
the arguments, but this could be a list of lets us say 5, 6 or 7 points and
then we say some Governors are of the opinion that this process towards a
monetary union would be strengthened if one would set up a Reserve Fund,
etc. but then, Jacques, I think we also have to say that other Governors
are of the opinion that this is not necessary and that there are legal
difficulties - just in order to balance the whole thing and mention both

arguments as a statement.

- 28 -
M. J. de Larosiére (418 - 424)

I agree with that, Karl Otto, and I also agree with your other
idea of having some rules, as Mr. Hoffmeyer put it, which would be
incorporated. We mustn't write them in a too rigid way because we mustn't
give the impression that we are putting so many preconditions that nothing

will ever happen. The idea is interesting.
The Rt. Hon. Robert Leigh-Pemberton (426 - 435)

I may not fully have understood where we have got to but may I
just simply say that I can answer these two questions in the affirmative,
given the explanation that we have had since lunch. I have one question
about it and that is to do with your comment, Mr. Chairman, at one stage in
which you said that each stage would have to be given a deadline in the

Treaty ... I misunderstood.
M. A. Lamfalussy (477 - 494)

I also have a suggestion concerning the calendar. It is the
beginning of the first stage that I am concerned with for the reasons that
I mentioned this morning. I am very very much interested in having the
closer monitoring and ex ante advisory function of the EEC Governors
starting as quickly as possible. There may be two ways of doing this (p.
2), either when the Directive for the full liberalisation of capital
movements comes into force, i.e. implementation of the stage 1 reinforced
(A), or if that happens earlier, when the Heads of State and governments
set in motion the Treaty negotiation. I don't see why one should wait until
1990 if the Heads of State and governments say, let us go ahead with the

Treaty. Let us then put in motion the first step.
The Chairman (494 - 498)

I propose that the first step begins on lst July 1990, in

accordance with the full liberalisation of capital between countries,

~ 29 -
M. A. Lamfalussy (498 - 506) (Interpretation)

No, but my proposal is to start even earlier should the Heads of
State and heads of governments decide to start the Treaty negotiations. If
they could decide at the end-of-year summit in December, for instance, that
negotiations should start, I don't see why Governors should wait another

six months.
Mr. E. Hoffmeyer (514 - 541)

There are three places where the Committee is of an opinion, that
is pe 1, second to last para., p. 2, second to last para., and p. 6, second
to last para. Those are the only places where the Committee as such is
mentioned and it has an opinion. I wonder why this has been selected in
that way, because I am not so sure that there is so much logic in it? You
can say that if the Heads of State want to realise economic and monetary
union you have to change the Treaty, but this is not the opinion of the
Committee, it is a decision that has been taken by the Heads of State and
1f they really want to realise it then they have to change the Treaty. The
Committee is generally in favour of the principle of subsidiarity, which is
not a word that exists and is spelled in a wrong way. Then you have the
Committee on p. 2 considers that the condition for moving from stage 1 to
stage 2 cannot be defined in advance. This is not an opinion of the
Committee, it is a fact I think. Then on p. 6 the Committee is in favour of
concluding a single comprehensive act which would formulate clearly the
essential features and institutional arrangements of economic and monetary
union. This is not the Committee's opinion it is the consequence of the

decision of the Heads of State. That should be clear.
Dott. C.A. Ciampi (548 - 603)

In accordance with what I said this morning on p. 5 I propose a
modification in the first indent, the creation by 1992. I think we have to
start by 1990 not 1992. I have prepared a proposal saying "the complete
liberalisation of capital transactions by the middle of 1990 is an
irreversible process in which European countries are already engaged. There

is, however, a risk of creating a surge in balances between the constraints
; - 30 -

to which national monetary policy will be submitted in the absence of an ?
procedure to establish ???? monetary system. Elimination of the imbalance
requires central banks of countries participating in the EMS to transform
monetary policy co-ordination from an ex post to an ex ante exercise at
both internal and external levels.'' This may, of course, be redrafted in a
better way but I think that this is what several of us have said this
morning: to put the emphasis not only on 1992 but to put the emphasis on
1990 and the problem of organisation.

I have also some other ... for instance, p. 9 the first indent.
Formulate a recommendation if possible, if I want to be more stringent my
proposal is: "formulate a recommendation on the overall orientation of a
monetary and exchange rate policy, as well as on measures taken in this
field by individual countries. In particular, the Committee would be
consulted in advance of a measure of decisions on the course of a monetary
policy, such as this setting of annual domestic monetary and credit
targets. They could declare publicly, in the event of speculative capital
flows are warranted by fundamentals or by underlying monetary policy, that
European central banks all stand ready to counteract them by appropriate
interventions." Something which implies a common evaluation and a common
action in order to face this kind of movement. |

A third point on - this was p.9- but p. ll, at the end. To
conduct Limited exchange rate market interventions I propose to add - no
this is not the case because it regards ... We are on p. 2, I propose to
add that the ESCB would intervene in the market to stem capital movements
among member countries which were judged to be in contrast to the
fundamentals and negatively affecting an otherwise sound monetary policy.

Maybe this goes too far. I give up.
Mr. F. Andriessen (642 - 671)

I ask the floor for two reasons, the first has already been dealt
with, it was the suggestion that we should give drafting suggestions to the
Secretariat. I have some drafting suggestions as well. My second
observation would be a para. about the Treaty on p. 6. (The Chairman:
before 20th January.) As far as the Treaty is concerned, I have’ some
doubts, Mr. President, whether we can obtain the totality of the exercise

in one national parliamentary go unless we draft very carefully in the

- 31 -

Treaty the moments on which we have to judge whether the conditions to go
to the next stage have been fulfilled, etc. I would just draw the attention
of the Committee to this point. There is in my view, politically speaking,
an important element here. National parliaments being supposed in this
context to transfer powers to some supranational body, the supranational
parliament not being or not having sufficient powers to deal with the
matter and I think that is not a matter of drafting but a matter of
discussion to see how we can conceive a system in which we can, of course,
avoid too many parliamentary discussions, be it on a national be it on a
Community basis, without running the risk that people wouldn't pass it
because they think that in the too long term they have to give too much
power to something which they don't know exactly. I think that is a point

which merits some more consideration in this Committee.
M. J. de Larosiére (671 - 704)

That is why if I may say it is so important that we give
assurances to parliaments that the moving from one step to another is under
proper conditions. I think that is very important. I agree with all that
has been said and I will also give to the Secretariat my own detailed
suggestions which are not very numerous. I had two points on which I wanted
to make a remark. |

Firstly, when the Rapporteurs come to my idea I just wanted to
make it clear that at the very end of p. 4, it is said in contrast to
Scenario B only, in Scenario B only those countries which fully participate
in the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS would participate in the ERF. Now
I know that this is not going to remain as such because we are not going to
have two scenarios, but what is important is that I make my point clear. It
looks as if this was very arbitrary in A everybody is in, in B there are
only a few and now the idea is because of the role of ERF in terms of the
possible impact of interventions on EMS ERM currency relationships. That is
the idea of this apparent discrimination, there is a reason of substance so
I wanted that to be reflected somewhere.

My second point is a question more than anything else. It is the
idea that is in brackets somewhere, I think it is on p. 10 - no it's not in
brackets it is the figure that in brackets. That says that margins of

fluctuations would be narrowed from 2.25% to, e.g. 1%. I would like just to

- 32 -

make a remark here. Is this the right thing to do? We are going to submit
this ensemble of countries to higher pressures in the beginning because of
the liberalisation of capital movements, etc., should we narrow the bands
at this point? I wonder if it is a wise thing, I have a little bit of a

doubt.
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg (723 - 773)

Three remarks on p. 10, 11 and 12. Page 10, to follow up on Gov.
de Larosiére's remark under the heading EMS arrangements at the top. Taking
the square brackets and the remark about fluctuating margins together, this
seems to me to be some contradiction here. The question is asked, or the
suggestion is made, to strengthen the credit mechanisms. That is not
entirely consistent I think with narrowing the fluctuation margins, because
if there is still a great danger of destabilising capital flows then
apparently convergence is yet insufficient to eliminate the feel in the
markets for changes in parities, and strengthening credit will not help
convergence it will postpone convergence rather than help convergence. The
possibilities to narrow the fluctuation margins are also determined by the
measure of convergence. I would think that significant progress in economic
convergence 1s a precondition for narrower margins, and I would plead to
reformulate it in that sense.

On page 1l, the second indent from the top, it says the centre
would also take a view on the exchange rates of the Community vis-a-vis
major third currencies. I ask myself what is the operational meaning of
this, because the main instruments to influence the relationship to third
currencies are in the hands, still at this stage, of the national central
banks - that is these interest rate policies and interventions. So I ask
myself what is the meaning of the centre taking a view here? I would like
the Rapporteurs to think about that one.

My final remark is on page 12 that the task of the ESCB would be
ee. and then the first full paragraph/dash: to represent the Community
together with representatives of national central banks in international
monetary meetings. If this is meant literally it is meant to be that the
centre 1s empowered to take a position on behalf of the Community. Then the
question arises, how this is compatible with national central banks also

taking part in this international fora? The centre on behalf of all of us
- 33 -

and we ourselves on behalf of ourselves, there it seems to me is a
possibility for friction and I would ask you to think about that one as
well.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, although it is not in order I would like
to say that I support - I disagree with Gov. de Larosiére and I _ support
him that the thought of some addition is being included and I also support
Gov. Pohl's view that other governors then also say why they do not like

the idea.
Mr. E. Hoffmeyer (775 - 806)

A brief elaboration on what Gov. Duisenberg said. I think that
this 2nd stage is rather thin in a way. If you look at p. 12 there are the
tasks of the ESCB, i.e. the central bank, there are technical tasks and
there are political tasks. The first one - form of ex ante co-ordination
and in brackets binding - I really don't know what one should say there
because according to the other indents it couldn't be binding because the
decision-making will lie with the national central banks. Then you come to
the second indent: let us conduct and again in brackets limited exchange
market intervention. Does that mean again that we have this question of
division of decision-making? This is a political thing and I don't think it
is workable. The third indent, which was what Gov. Duisenberg talked about,
represent the Community together with representatives of national central
banks in international monetary meetings. Does that have a meaning that you
have one who represents the Community and then you have individual central
banks? I think it is a zigzag thinking here, you really don't know where
the authority lies. The next indent: manage holdings of third currencies. I
can't go along with that because that is a technical question. Administer
short-term and very short-term financing mechanisms is also most technical.
Administer private ECU clearing system is also technical. Finally, the
Chairman would attend the ECOFIN meetings. But the political problems are
very hazy, it is very unclear what the thinking is. Is it again a_ training
exercise or is it connected with some kind of authority? I think you have
to make yourself clear about that because the Heads of State are
politicians and understand about reality, they know about decision-making
so you have to make your position clear there and gradualism is not that

easy.

- 34 -
Herrn K.O. Pohl (807 - 835)

eee all of us on stage 1, on the first step and that is I. think
by far the most important recommendation which we have to give and so I
haven't said anything about Part II. Firstly, I wonder why it is in Chapter
III and I have the same feelings you have. It depends very much on the
content of the Treaty how it would be implemented and I think it is
premature to make very concrete suggestions whether the Chairman of this
ESCB should represent the Community on international bodies, etc. The first
institutional step is to negotiate a Treaty, then in a Treaty you see what
responsibilities and tasks this European Central Bank has and it can easily
be that one comes to the conclusion that the move from the recent system
into the future system has to be one big step. That is my view, for
instance, I don't think we can do it gradually. My suggestion would be that
we do not elaborate very much on this transitional period, so to say from
stage 1 to the final stage. In my view it would be sufficient to
concentrate on stage 1, to try to make the list of recommendations more
concrete, for instance, on the exchange rate arrangements and mechanisms -
I think I could say a little more about that on the lines I mentioned this |
morning ~ convergence of policies, etc. and that we then concentrate on
Chapter II where we describe the final stage and leave open how we get from
here to there. That would be my suggestion because there one could really

talk a lot how the second stage should look, etc.
M. J. de Larosiére (910 - 928)

May I just say one word as a footnote to what Alexandre has said.
I think we have to, we must, try and write something on that stage 2,
especially if the very first step does not include institutional changes,
we then have to think twice before we say, well then we make the big leap
into the big future - which I don't think is very plausible. Then you have
to look into stage 2, not only in monetary terms but also in terms of
triggering economic things. You remember we said parallelism, now you can't
have parallelism if we say the rest is the future, you have to develop a
road and I think we are bound to have a reflection on what stage 2 will be.
My assumption is that if you don't want to do in stage 1 the type of things

I was suggesting to do at the very immediate, you will encounter them then.
-~ 35 -

If you really are serious about creating this ESCB then you have to pool
some of your reserves and do things like that, and if you don't want to do
it at the very first step you are going to have to do it in the’ second
stage. Then you can link these things to things in the fiscal ... I think

we mustn't just discard this.
Mr. N. Thygesen (929 - 944)

Most of what I wanted to say has been said by Gov. de Larosiére.
There is a major difference between 2 and 3. 2 is the institutional stage
where some members of the central bank governing board are nominated at the
European level, but I can see the problem that Gov. Hoffmeyer mentions and
it is explicit in the wording that the Rapporteurs have used at the top of
the page describing stage 2 in the summary. In one scenario they say that
instruments of policy have to be devolved to the centre, not of sufficient
Magnitude to overwhelm national policy decisions. In the other’ scenario,
which is meant I think to give the same impression, they say not of
sufficient magnitude to affect national policy decisions. I suggest the
truth lies somewhere in between the two, some interaction but closer
probably to overwhelm than to affect. It is important that we do devote
time to describing the 2nd stage, particularly after we have agreed to have
only one scenario for the lst stage. It is after all also part of the
Treaty process to describe the steps that lead to the final stage and we
can hardly have less than two well-described stages in that plan. I must

only support further discussion of stage 2.
Mr. M.F. Doyle (944 - 985)

Most of what I was going to say has in fact been said by Gov. de
Larosiere and I would agree with 95% of what he has just said. I am not
entirely clear on which the other 5% is for that matter, but my concerns
really come back to what I was mentioning this morning about the question
of parallelism. I think this is really fundamental to the content of stages
1, 2 and 3. If I might just point out maybe two examples of what I have in
mind. The bottom of page 4, which Gov. de Larosiére averted to earlier
where he was talking about Scenario B: only certain countries' shall

participate in the ERF, and we can skip the background explanation of that,

- 36 -

but on p. 10 then again - this is stage 1 we are still talking about - all
member countries in a position to do so - admittedly in square brackets -
would become participants in the exchange rate mechanism. Yet, nothing more
is said again on the exchange rate mechanism question until you come to p.
12 where it says: the beginning of this final stage (this is stage 3) would
be marked by the definite locking of parities. I have no quarrel with that
but I am left wondering if it is really wise or even practical in a
situation where some currencies in effect would be fully floating from
stage 1 right up to stage 3 and then would be expected overnight to become
locked into a totally irrevocable mechanism. I don't think that is even
practicable and I am leaving aside all the arguments about philosophy in
the thing, I think as a practicable and sensible suggestion, I don't think
it is on. That is really one of the basic reasons why I think stage 2, and
I would even say slightly earlier than that in stage 1, you have to have if
not all the currencies in a mechanism - I'll go no further than that - at
least you have to have definite progress in that direction. The.other side
of that coin is at the bottom of p. 10, and again this harks back to my
concern about parallelism, the last two indents on p. 10 talking about the
CEPC would be responsible for adoption of medium-term guidelines for key
financial targets and economic programmes, the joint adoption of which,
etc. I think stage 2 is much too late for that part to become live, I think
that notion has to be brought into stage 1to achieve any kind of
parallelism in the thing at all. This is indeed what P. Jaans was saying
earlier too. In other words, to put it as P. Jaans said, you need the
revision of the 1974 Decision in stage 1 to get that working, because that
hasn't even started yet. On a small point maybe I could say one thing that
puzzled me slightly at the bottom of p. 9 where it is talking about the
Committee's opinions and recommendations would not have to reflect
unanimity but could be established by a qualified majority, the
recommendations would not be binding in which case I am wondering what is

the point in having weighted votes?
Herrn K.O. Pohl (1009 - 1051)
I had the same feeling when I read that with this ESCB or

whatever it is. We shouldn't give recommendations which nobody would really

take seriously, they would laugh at us if you say something like that
- 37 -

because that is so unrealistic. I think it would be much better to be
realistic and just say that the process of convergence has to be maintained
and that co-operation in the FECOM, etc. should be intensified, something
on these lines instead of inventing new institutions all the time. In areas
where we are not actually competent. So I would rather prefer to forget
this expression and use the existing institutions, but we have to discuss
that again.

On the other subject, 2nd and 3rd stage, I wonder whether we
should be too precise in that respect and whether it is not better - I
agree that one cannot conceive such a big jump, that is also very
unrealistic, but on the other hand, if we are too precise and say this is
stage 2 and that is stage 3, that is also maybe not inline. It is a
process and if we would express that in our Report by saying the final
stage, the final fixing of exchange rates is actually the final stage,
irrevocably fixed exchange rates and completely free capital movements,
that is still some time ahead but we are moving in that direction. The lst
stage we have discussed this morning and if the degree of convergency has
improved even more than it has, and we have made a lot of progress as you
said this morning quite rightly and we will describe that in Chapter I,
than one can envisage passing more power, maybe even decision-making power
step-by-step to let us say the Council of Governors and should transform
that Council in the nucleus of a ESCB. The details will have to be solved
when we arrive at this stage, or something like that. I think that is
better than describing in great detail now, which I think is impossible, we
really don't know when that will happen and if it will ever happen, so
maybe in 3 or 4 years we will have very different views on that. I can live
with that. (? Simply an illustration or reflection of the chief of ?.) For
instance, it is not a concrete question whether the Chairman of this group
should represent the governors in their international monetary meetings.
What meetings do you mean? I am the German Governor of the IMF but I never
represent the German Government, it 1s always the Finance Minister, he is
my alternate and I let him represent my country. Formally he is the
alternate Governor only. What other international monetary meetings do we
have - G-7 meetings - the Americans wouldn't like the idea, they wouldn't
allow it. What other international monetary meetings do we have, I can't

tell you any.

- 38 -
M. J. de Larosiére (1051 - 1076)

With respect, President Pohl, it is more than a question of
representation in international meetings. It is a very important question.
If you really want to move towards a linkage of parities and a ESCB I think
we cannot avoid asking ourselves and saying it in the Report what would be
the nature and main characteristics of this progress in monetary
integration that eventually would have to happen in order to lead to the
final stage. We have to be able to visualise these things. I think you are
right that we mustn't go into too great detail, but I don't think you can
just say let us do the first things, which are the set of co-operative
measures and then we leap with a big jump into the future. You have to have
something that describes the types of progress that will make more
plausible, thus also more legally possible, the movement towards the final
integration. I don't have the answers on that, but I think it is right that
the Rapporteurs tried their hand at that and I. think we should give them
some indications today. In my concept there would be some beginning of
doing things together which would be easily incorporated in that stage 2
because you could build on it. If it is not agreed as the first stage what
I had suggested, I am afraid you are going to have to see how that can be
done in a second stage. I think then you have to visualise these things

even if it is a bit vague.
Herrn K.O. Pohl (1085 - 1106)

I think this is a very important point for our further work so I
am thinking about it. I understand your point and I agree with the
consideration but if we want to be concrete I think we really have to think
about which instruments we are really prepared to transfer to a
supranational institution in the 2nd stage, before the final stage. The
final stage is OK, that is not difficult because you have a central bank
and the central bank decides on interest rates, on liquidity, on
interventions - that is clear. But what are you doing in the transitional
period? We are saying, well national monetary policies still exist but they
are binding ex ante co-ordination, I think that is not consistent. If you
have a binding ex ante co-ordination you have no national monetary policy

anymore. If we decide amongst ourselves on supply targets, on liquidity
- 39 -

targets, credit targets, interest rates, exchange rate targets, etc. what
can the national central bank still do? That is not consistent I think. So
if we would say for instance, in the second phase we could transfer let us
Say the right to intervene in exchange markets against third currencies to
this institution and the institution should also set general targets for
monetary aggregates, but we leave it to the national central banks to
execute these global guidelines. Something on those lines I think would be
feasible, much better than going into these technical details of whether

the Chairman should represent the Committee, etc.
Mr. W.F. Duisenberg (1331 - 1337)

May I by way of interruption follow up on what Mr. Lamfalussy has
said. I support Gov. Ciampi's suggestion which he makes of p. 4 where he
writes that the Committee could propose that the European Council
officially declare that a currency of the future European monetary union
will be the ECU. I think that is a very useful suggestion, so that the ECU

gets imprimatur of the European Council for the future.
Mr. M. Boyer (1405 - 1435) (Interpretation)

I think that the subject dealt with in Gov. Ciampi's paper seems
to indicate that the ECU is not going to be very useful before there is
convergence between inflation rates. Once there is very good convergence
between inflation rates, the exchange rates are going to be practically
fixed so the currencies can be perfect substitutes for one another and
hence the ECU won't be terribly useful. It will be useful only at the last
stage, during the final stage when one has a single currency. Now there is
some doubt as to the usefulness of the ECU throughout the process’ before
the terminal stage. Gresham's law will apply throughout, before the final
stage the ECU is not going to be terribly useful. As for monetary control
technique, the supply of currency by the Community as such and by its
member countries, perhaps, this is not something that ought to be dealt
with in detail in the Report. One could of course produce a highly
technical Report detailing the best means of control, the principles and
co-ordination that would be necessary, implying a transfer of sovereignty.

So the techniques of controlling monetary supply, I think that one could

- 40 -

leave this to a discussion of the Committee of Governors or the central
bank at that time and not to try and think too much about such methods now.
Since Mr. Lamfalussy raised the question and there is a very interesting
proposal on this by Gov. Ciampi. Should there be a quantitative control of
the monetary base or should one follow the American example, the open
market system, to deal with the money base. Once there is a common monetary
policy the only thing one would be able to envisage is to give certain
directives to central banks as to what the expansion that is desirable is
like and then give them a free hand to achieve this. Another alternative, a
quantitative control. What is difficult to envisage is open market
transactions at a European scale in order to control the monetary base, but
I think that we can leave this to the technical discussion between central
banks which will take place whenever these matters will be pertinent and we

should concentrate on more general matters of a less technical nature.
The Rt. Hon. Robert Leigh-Pemberton (1460 - 1501)

May I just make some comments first of all on what Wim Duisenberg
said about the monetary base and the use of that in what I understand of
Carlo's suggestions for a monetary control technique in the Community. Wim
said that we had tried the monetary base technique in the UK, we actually
haven't ever got as far as using it, we considered it some time back but we
didn't think then that it would be a useful technique in the UK and it is
my feeling, and our feeling generally in the Bank of England, that it would
be even less likely to work well on a pan-European scale. The reason for
this is, of course, the case for monetary base control really rests heavily
on the assumption or the existence of a stable relationship between demand
for the monetary base and the wider monetary aggregates or other key
economic variables at work in the economy. Not only that that stable
relationship exists, but it will also remain stable when the authorities
act upon it. We have come to the conclusion in the UK that that
relationship does not actually survive either in developing economic
Situations, or least of all when the authorities start to work on it. If I
may go on from there, I don't think Carlo says this explicitly in his
paper, but it seems logical from what he says to assume that national
central banks under the system that he envisages would seek to control

national monetary bases by means of compulsory reserves. You will either

- 41 -

have to hand in reserves or you will be allocated increased reserves
according to your need. Surely the difficulty here is that compulsory
reserves are in effect a sort of tax on banking and that the banks will
therefore seek ways of mitigating the liability for the tax, or
alternatively the effect of the control on their monetary base. It may be
that there will be fewer opportunities or less incentives to avoid the
liability if there is not a well-developed money market, if capital
movements are restricted, and if the banking system operates as a sheltered
cartel or enjoys a special relationship with the government, but certainly
in the UK none of these conditions are met at the moment and it seems to me
that if we move into a European Community with full liberalisation of
capital movements and the completion of the internal market in financial
services, it is unlikely that those conditions will apply in the future
Community either. I therefor feel sceptical about the effectiveness of the
sort of monetary control that your system envisages through this method of
the control of bank's reserves. I am sorry to come to that conclusion but I
think that that is what would happen and in putting this forward I draw
rather on mostly the experience and considerations to be had in the .UK on
this very subject. While I am talking about experience in the UK may I
endorse what Mr. Doyle has said about the change in a currency, there is no
doubt that when we went to decimalisation ordinary retailers, almost
universally, used it as a means of increasing their prices and this may be
a long way ahead in the Community, but we have got to recognise that unless
we are ingenious in some way or another we shall have just the same
experience here. People round up their prices instinctively. I have got
various other points to make, really which come on the matter of a common
currency in general, but I think I shall stop there for the moment because
they are rather different points on the way the discussion is at the

moment.
Mr. N. Thygesen (1502 - 1521)

Just two brief comments, the first relates to what Gov.
Leigh-Pemberton just said. I wonder whether the experience of monetary base
control of a central bank vis-a-vis its own private banks is relevant in
this context. What we are talking about here is a relationship between an

international or European system in the national central banks. It is I
-~ 42 -

think more constructive to think in terms of the gold standard as it
functioned in the old days when central banks' domestic credit creation was
controlled by the availability of an asset which they could not themselves
produce or supply. I don't think that the problems of control that you
referred to in the national banking system would necessarily apply in this
case. (7: May I just interrupt a moment. Think about a situation in which
there are no foreign exchange controls, and therefore banks can borrow
freely from overseas to supplement their base.) The question is what the
Bank of England can do to get itself official ECUs in the proposed system.
It is a relationship between a European monetary authority and the national
central banks, rather than between the national banks and their private
domestic banks. Surely Gov. Ciampi is right in saying that this is one way
of managing, possibly too tightly, the national central banks. It might be
done in other ways, and as I read the paper the authors become worried at
some stage that the system may be too tight and therefore they discuss p.
10 and onwards on the methods of introducing more flexibility in the way in
which national central banks can by exchanging ? the foreign exchange
reserves, obtain some more official ECU. But they cannot do so even in the
most liberalised system. That will be seen by some as a virtue of this
system, but I think the approach is right. It is one way of doing it but it

is certainly not the only one.

Mr. W.F. Duisenberg (1593 - 1607)

I qualify Gov. Ciampi's proposal as one of the possibilities in
the final stage, by implication that means, and I am sure that Gov. Ciampi
will agree, that there are many ways which lead to Rome. We all live today
in an age of financial deregulation, liberalisation, financial innovation,
technological innovation and we all, as Governors of Central Banks, are
groping with the monetary control and the instruments which we can use in
order to exert monetary control. Not one of us has found the final answer
and therefore I would suggest not to stand still for too long today by what
instrument we can use when we have reached a final stage, which certainly
will be after tomorrow but I don't know how long after tomorrow. I don't
have the pretention to know now already what in that future will be the
most efficient set of monetary instruments. Of course I would be very

grateful for the balance-sheet example of Gov. Ciampi, perhaps it can be
- 43 -

added to the Report as a sort of Appendix, illustration, but I think we
could care about the most efficient way of controlling our monetary
developments and our monetary aggregates when the time is there and not now

already.
M. A. Lamfalussy (1626 - 1660)

I would like to come back just for a minute to Gov. Ciampi's
paper. My understanding of his proposal is that it would apply, of course
it could apply, to the final stage, but it would also or could also apply
at the end or in stage 2. In other terms at a time when exchange rates
could still be changed. Take that situation and look into that’ situation.
If you take his proposal, this would mean that the balance sheet of the
individual central banks as expressed in ECUs would be under the control of
the central fund in ECUs, there would be a formal relationship. In other
words, the ability of the individual central banks to expand the balance
sheet would be limited by the supply of the central ECUs to the central
bank. Let us imagine that we have very different monetary control
techniques in the individual central banks vis-a-vis their own banking
systems, and you can perfectly well imagine that the relationship between
the own balance sheet of the individual central banks and the domestic
money supply ... relations not only are different from country to country
but move in a different direction - this is perfectly possible with the
sort of deregulator system we have, we may have a velocity circulation
difference. If that happens you are blocked in because you may have to
defend the parities at that time by expanding or contracting the balance
sheet of the central bank in a way which would go in opposite directions.
You would lose your own freedom to defend your own parities. If there was
some sort of disturbance of a differential nature between countries,
between central bank domestic monetary base and domestic monetary supply,
and we simply don't know whether that would not happen. It has been
happening in every single country around the table for five years. We would
have a major difficulty in that situation and you could get yourself into a
very bizarre situation that. the domestic central bank would be unable to
defend its own currency or the other one who would have to expand couldn't
expand it. That is why I think we do have a basic doubt about the stability

of these functions as R. Leigh-Pemberton expressed. (?: you mention the end

- 44 -

of the phase 1 and the beginning of phase 2?) That would be stage 2. (72:3
defend by what means?) By changing its own domestic monetary policy because
your own balance sheet would be defined by the relationship between the
central ECU ? and your own balance sheet. (7: Defend your own currency, if
you say it is under pressure in a negative way, does that mean that you
couldn't raise it?) You could contract it, but then the other one cannot
expand it and ... (?: the banks could borrow of course, yes, but there are

differences of interest rates).
M. de Larosiére (1660 - 1696) (Interpretation)

I would like to say something very briefly. I think that the ECU
has a name which is already a virtue in itself, markets have got used to
it, central bank reserves hold a non-negligible amount of ECUs in their
reserves - several billion - therefore it seems to me a rather good idea to
give an imprimatur to the ECU. I think it is an easy way of thereby
obtaining matrix for the future European currency and hence I am very much
in agreement with this idea. As for the system proposed by Gov. Ciampi, I
think that the most interesting thing perhaps in his proposal is para. 19,
the one which says that the central institution will have to decide each
year how much money and credit should be created in a community in order to
support economic activity in a non-inflationary environment. This really is
the core idea, it is this which will give body to the common monetary
policy. He proposes a system which as I have said is one among other
systems, this system has great faith in one relationship, the relationship
between what one calls the monetary basis, notes in circulation of reserves
on the one hand, and monetary aggregates on the other. Experience there is
as far as that relationship is concerned, and anyway one would say that
this kind of relationship is not terribly reliable. Like Gov. Duisenberg I
think that one should not reject this out of hand because one would have to
find at the European level systems to control monetary creation in each one
of our countries. This system as proposed is a simplistic one, rather
automatic one, but which may have the virtue of simplifying matters. My
thoughts are not yet firm on this. I think that Alexandre was right to
point out that one may run into difficulties although I think that the
problems he referred to might be taken care of by having special reserves

and having a deal of flexibility. Mr. Ciampi's paper indicates that they
- 45 -

themselves got cold feet about the rigid character of their system and
introduced a certain degree of flexibility. I think it is interesting to
refer to this kind of thinking. Everybody talks about ECU creation as being
one way of getting the European monetary system to make progress and we
have just said that the idea of rejecting a parallel currency, the ECU, to
the present system was not a good idea, it is an important thing that we
have said here and I agree also that this injection is not a good idea. It
is not going to get the system to move, it is a rather complicated idea and
a somewhat disturbing idea, but it is not enough for us to say this. I
think that we should say that the ECU after all is the prefiguration of our
common currency and we can go a little further and say that it may be the
Support of methods for monetary control to be used by central banks.
Ciampi's paper is an imaginative one, it has been well-written and is very

logical and it could be used by way of an illustration.
Herrn K.O. Pohl (1696 - 1750)

I fully agree with what Gov. de Larosiére said. I think that
Ciampi's proposal is very interesting and that we should include that in
our further considerations, but this is something for the future so to say.
I have one little intellectual problem, that is if you have a European
institution which is able to control the money supply, the room for
manoeuvre for national central banks, then I ask myself why do you need
national central banks in such a system? Why can't you say then we have a
European central bank and we don't need national central banks because the
national central banks have practically no function anymore, they are not
able to pursue anything which could be called an autonomous monetary
policy. They are only branches of this European institution, which can of
course use the ECU as the European currency. I agree with what Lamfalussy
said that finally if you have locked exchange rates, at least from an
aesthetic point of view, it would be nicer to have a common currency
instead of 12 national currencies which are locked. That is a little
futuristic if I may say so. We can say in our Report that the ECU can
become the European currency in the final Stage or something along those
lines, and that the ECU could be used as a monetary instrument, something

in that direction. I have no objection to that.

- 46 -

The second point is that we should take a rather positive

attitude towards the ECU, I agree with that. We should say that we have
learnt that there a private market has been developed for ECUs, it is an
instrument so to say amongst others. Interesting enough to me is the
statistics we learned about, and it is not those countries which have no
restrictions, where the ECU is used most, it is exactly the opposite,
countries Like Holland and Germany where you have no restrictions on the
use of ECUs at all, you have no capital controls, no exchange controls, the
relevance of the ECU is practically nil. In other countries, like Italy,
Belgium where you have had until recently some kind of restriction the ECU
was more popular because, in the case of Italy I think it is very obvious
it was an instrument to avoid the restrictions on capital controls. I
wonder if in a fully liberalised system, a deregulated system with free
capital movement the ECU will play a significant role. I think it will
deteriorate, but that remains to be seen and we should tell the public that
we aS a group are of the opinion that there is no reason to restrict the
use of this instrument.

On the official use of commercial ECUs, we have taken the
decision to enable the Swiss National Bank to hold official ECUs - I think
it was a good decision and I am in favour of that. If we could persuade
other central banks in the world - in Japan, the US - to hold ECUs' instead
of DM or sterling, that would be fine. I don't think it will play a major
role but if that would be developed as a European instrument it would be
fine with me and we can say that in our Report. It has also some relevance
if we say it. Having said that we should not forget the conclusions in
Duisenberg's paper which are I think very important and which means that
this concept of a parallel currency is really "ein Irrweg" and that then
the discussion will be finished. That is also very important. The question
of the link between the official and the private ECU that is something we
have to discuss in the Council of Governors maybe in more detail, but that
is also a concept which I think we should come to a conclusion. At least I
would insist on a statement, a para., saying that this is not conceivable
as long as the responsibilities and the powers of a European institution
which issues is not defined. In other words before we have a European
central bank system you cannot envisage an institution which is responsible
for the control of the private ECU, because it means that central banks are

responsible for the currency of other central banks, this I think is a very

- 47 -

far-reaching concept. That is the third conclusion in Mr. Duisenberg's
paper and I think we should also take note in our Report of this
conclusion. Having said that, maybe we will destroy some illusions about
the ECU in political circles and in the European Parliament, but on the
other hand maybe we can add some realism and could put it in the right

dimension this instrument. That would be good and I would appreciate that.
M. J. de Larosiére (1753 - 1761) (Interpretation)

Surely during the final stage one would have to give a
description of what one would be doing with a method other than Mr.
Ciampi's, even if central banks become branches of a common central bank.
Nevertheless, there must be methods for the control of the issue of
currency by the central banks, methods must exist. Yes, of course, we want
quantitative targets, but we ought also to have targets which can be
applied by the various central banks. Mr. Ciampi has offered one and we
will have to think about practical methods, perhaps it is too technical a
matter to be put in a Report for Heads of State but we have to do

something.
The Chairman (1763 - 1820) (Interpretation)

I think that there were three common conclusions which have been
referred to by Pres. Pohl right at the start of this discussion. We will
have to explain why we are not in favour of a parallel currency, why we are
interested in the further development of the ECU, which would be one of the
reasons why we would advocate the abandonment of any constraints and
restraints as to its use. How do we handle the link between the public and
the private ECU during the different phases? I think that is important and
that it ought to be said. Then this being said we still have to answer
three questions it seems to me.

Firstly, what will one say to those who quite imprudently say
that by promoting the use of the ECU in every shape and form one helps to
bring about economic and monetary union. If our Report Says nothing about
this then not later than 8 days after its publication so-called eminent
personalities would come forth and will say, but the Committee have missed

the secret solution to achieve this economic and monetary union, namely the.
¥

¢,
“

<< EAS

- 48 -

ECU, without at all saying whether they are thinking about the private ECU,
the public ECU or anything of that nature. One has to supply oneself with
the necessary ammunition to kill this kind of thing. Once we reach the
final stage and once we have said that the ECU might very well become a
common currency, how would that work in the light of what we know now? Gov.
Ciampi has made a contribution, are there any others who have a
contribution to make?

Thirdly, from the point of view of monetary policy we find
ourselves in a peculiar situation. Many confess that in view of the
internationalisation and growing interdependence between markets, because
of financial and technical innovations, it becomes more and more difficult
for a national central bank to be in full technical and intellectual
control of monetary policy, let alone economic policy. At the same time we
are here trying to build a structure at the top of which there is going to
be some sort of Federal institution and some sort of European Central Bank,
and what is it going to do? Is it just going to issue recommendations? What
are its links going to be with national central banks? Even more
politically, what answer are we going to give those who say, obviously we
see that this Committee comprised mainly central bank governors, they have
concentrated more on monetary union, but they haven't explained at all how
they would be able to cope with this difficulty of controlling money
supply. What monetary policy? This last point is not strictly connected
with the Report we have to submit, but in view of what 1s going to happen
to our Report, and if we don't want to be criticised by people who say,
monetary policy has become of secondary importance, or people who are going
to critics internationalisation of markets or the liberalisation of capital
movements, we must be prepared to answer them. Everybody seems to be in
favour of liberalisation of capital movements here, in favour of a European
financial services market and what instruments do we have to remain in
control? We have to give an answer to such a question. A great deal still
remains to be done on this and if you could think about this between now
and the next meeting, this would be very helpful. At the next meeting we
would pick up this discussion again. Perhaps the Rapporteurs would put all
these questions onto one page, quite an informal piece of paper which will
be called "A propos de 1‘ECU", questions about the ECU. Then we shall
discuss regional policy, now we know that this is an essential element and

you have already received Gov. Doyle's paper on this and as I had said at

- 49 -

the beginning of the work of this Committee, I have asked experts to’ send
in contributions and now we have to produce a synthesis from this and we
shouldn't forget also about what has already been decided within the
Community. Finally, we are going to look at the revised version of Section
II. If we manage to go through all of this on 14th February, perhaps we
might start at 10.30, we have to be careful about the outsiders who are
members of our Committee, we might perhaps complete this and then we would
have two full meetings in which we are going to read through the Report
line by line and thus’ we shall hopefully complete our work in good time.
The Secretaries and I myself have certainly taken on board your words of
advice about being careful not to have an imbalanced Report, to be too
detailed about some matters and not enough about others, not to go into
details which are not for Heads of State or for heads of government, but at
the same time to muster sound arguments on critical matters. We have
critics who have always issued serious reservations about the very idea of
trying to build Europe through the currency. As for Section II, when we
reread it you will have to think about this balance between economic union
and monetary union and the idea of an economic co-operation centre, this
terminology will disappear. We are going to come forward with another
proposal which will make use of existing bodies. I don't know whether you
agree with me, but if you create two supranational centres and economic and

monetary centres then the whole thing becomes totally unrealistic.

